Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
The venue is the Swicker office.
The date is the 20th of October 2014.
And the interviewee is Rob Smith.
Rob could you spell your name in full for us for the record?
R-O-B-E-R-T-S-M-I-T-H.
Thanks very much.
Rob amongst your many attributes, you are musical director and founder of Wunderbras.
Could you tell us a little bit about the origins of Wunderbras?
Yeah around the mid 80s there was a workshop project run by the Welsh Jazz Society.
And I was playing a lot with actually when it started when the Four Bars Inn opened,
which is where it was based.
Now Dempsey's.
When that opened I was actually working with the dance company away in Ireland for a while.
So when we came back we kind of missed out on this place.
Opening up.
Yeah.
You need a lower recording level Pumery.
Where's your recording level bro?
Input level.
So yeah that's better isn't it?
You can still hear me.
Yeah.
It's peaking around 12.
Yeah minus 12 that's where I'd go.
So yeah so suddenly this new venue had opened in Cardiff.
This is going a bit a long way around the houses.
But myself and Jess Phillips who I was working with a lot at that time,
we just started going along to the workshop band and they went through a lot of tutors really quickly.
And at some point after a couple of years or a year and a half or something they said well why don't you run it.
So we decided to run it.
And we changed the way it worked really instead of just being a load of people turning up and playing solos in a set order.
We tried to build it into a functioning band almost like a little big band.
And we were ticking over with this quite nicely doing the odd performance in the four bars.
And then the carnival started up.
Mass carnival started up with Swicker in 1990.
And you wanted street music.
So basically we said well we've got all these musicians.
Let's use this workshop band to create the street music.
So the first one was in 1990.
I'd already worked with you on running some community music.
Well it was a kind of community music orchestra for the final Taliesin project.
I believe it was the final Taliesin project which was Mad Dog.
So we put together a little community band for that which was nothing really to do with the jazz society.
It was completely set up by Swicker and it was bringing people in who were interested in community music I suppose and getting involved.
But in a fairly non-specialised way.
Just waiting for that peak to disappear.
So we did that and we brought these two things together to create a street band for the first mass carnival.
I think I wrote some music especially for it.
I think I remember the...
It was very much based on Soka music that first one.
So I worked out some original pieces and we took part in the parade.
And that gave a new dimension to the workshop band really because it meant that we could...
We didn't only have to play jazz, we could play street music and I personally was very excited by this.
Wind forward a couple of years later I'm training to be a community musician with Community Music Wales and I have to start up a project.
For my final project as part of that.
I mean if it was run now it would be a masters.
It was a really involved year long course.
It was way more than people have to do for a masters now but for some reason it wasn't.
So it was just a certificate in community music training.
But the final project you had to start up something and run it and evaluate it.
And I noticed that a lot of people we were working with, the musicians, what they wanted to do, they wanted to show off.
They wanted to play really long solos over jazz standards.
Whereas me and Jess were more into building something communally and getting people to be more creatively involved.
We were also into street music.
I'd been to New Orleans in 1991.
I think for the 1991 mass we brought Claude down to beef up the street band.
Because he worked with the Grand Union and he'd done loads of street music.
He knows a hell of a lot about that kind of music.
So we brought Claude Depper down in 1991.
And in that year I also got to go to New Orleans, total coincidence, and saw how street music could work in that context.
So I was really, I think at that period, the early 90s, I got a real appetite for street music.
Street brass music let's call it.
Because I thought it was something that was, I thought it was kind of, nobody was really doing it around here.
A couple of bands doing it, the sort of politically motivated bands like the Fallout band and things like that.
But I felt there was a way of doing it a lot better.
So anyway, the final project came up.
I thought all these guys, they don't really want to be in a street band.
So I'm going to start up a street band.
So the garden festival, Ebbw Vale Garden Festival in 1992, they gave us the seed funding of 500 quid to start something up in the valleys.
We found a very dynamic person called Denise Lord.
And she put together a band for a theatre project about, I think, the year before, Valley of the Kings, I think it was called.
And she was keen to try and get something going.
So we teamed up with her and we got and we started this little workshop in the valleys in Pontepri.
In the Muni Arts Centre, actually, the first sessions were.
And the first session, no, no, it was at Club of Bond, actually.
But the first session, nobody turned up.
And she said, don't miss out next week.
Come in fortnight time and I'll get in touch with all the contacts that I made for Valley of the Kings.
And I'll make sure that there are people here.
And so we said, OK.
And we we we trust we didn't have any option but to trust that she knew what she was doing.
So we turned up two weeks later and there were about 10 people there.
And we thought, well, we've got a project, you know, it'll run it for 10 weeks and they'll see out.
But after that 10 weeks, we performed a bit at the garden festival and a couple of selected venues in the valleys, really choice venues like the Gunnar's Estate.
Parading around the Gunnar's Estate where people just came out of their houses and stared at you as if you just beamed down from Mars or something.
And and then people who were in it were really didn't want to stop after 10 weeks.
So then they they got together and formed a committee and applied for the money to keep it going.
And they got that money and it's still going.
It's still going and it continues to go from strength to strength up and down, but from strength to strength.
Really, that's basically it.
But and that's a long winded story.
But that is it basically there is this tension with working with jazz musicians and doing street music is that a lot of jazz musicians, they just want to be in a club and playing.
They've got this image of what jazz is about, and it doesn't involve going out on the streets.
If it does, it's in a warm climate.
And it's but there are some of us in the band who are really enthusiastic about street music.
And it's the enthusiasm of that fear that call that's kept the street side of Wanderbass going.
And you've performed and led street bands in an extraordinary number of card carpools with quickly totting them up.
And you come to the grand total of 20 out of 25, which makes you a carpool hero.
Well, I've taken I've ticked the ones I'm pretty sure we did.
And I think I think it's 20.
I think it's about 20.
I can well believe that.
Obviously, your forte is music and the music is vitally important for giving the energy for groups to dance to.
But in terms of costume and the various costumes that have been made for and provided for you and for Wanderbass, are there any good, bad or not or good, bad or ugly that stick in your mind, stuff that worked or stuff that malfunctioned?
Well, there was one there was one we we once did a carnival.
This must have been around the time that we started.
What Wanderbass can't have been very going for very long at this point.
But we did we did a little section of of mass with chapter for children.
And we had these guys who were basically students looking for a summer work placement.
They were our students and they made these beautiful costumes.
But they weren't used to mass, so they just made one off costumes.
And so the costumes were beautiful and the kids helped to design them.
And the thing looked amazing, but they weren't really, you know, until you've actually walked a costume, you probably don't know much about comfort and things like that.
And they came up with this amazing costume.
The fruit was the theme and this amazing orange costume.
There's nobody to walk it.
So I just said, all right, well, I'm not it's not staying in the box.
I'm going to walk it.
So I I decided I was going to play and there's still photos of me wearing this looking like Sun Ra or something.
It's a beautiful costume, but it's bizarre.
Bright orange, bright orange, sparkly stuff all over it and extensions and things like that.
The problem with it was that it had a it had a sort of with the frame over the head and and he had this big hat on.
And whenever the wind blew, it it blew up and it pushed my chin like that.
So it caught me under the chin and pushed my chin up, which when you're playing the soprano sax is really uncomfortable.
So I ended up like with cuts all over my chin and everything at the end of that parade.
So that one left a mental scar.
And I and I can't some of the yes, basically the ones that really stick in your mind are the ones that they either they haven't really thought it through.
Or they they've thought it through, but they have forgot to think about the practicalities of playing an instrument.
So the best things are just to stick a bit of a hat on us and drape something over us and leave us in fairly comfortable clothing because they really I mean, a lot of the guys who design the costumes.
I mean, it's better now because obviously they've done it a few times, but they used to they forgot how hard we were working just to play the instrument sometimes.
And to give us extra things to do and the extra things to think about, it doesn't really work for musicians.
So I'm in on a lot of ones where bits of costume have been discarded as part of the parade.
But that one stuck in the mind.
It's interesting you mentioned stamina and exhaustion and well, you didn't mention exhaustion, but I just have.
And of course, an average
kind of carnival, kind of mass carnival parade would be an hour to 90 minutes.
What's that like trying to keep the energy up or even just the physicality of your lungs must be the size of God knows what I mean.
Well, you have to pace yourself and you know, you you think, right, we're going to have we're going to be going down St Mary Street.
And if the if it's gone well, if it's a nice day, you know, you're going to get a big crowd in St Mary Street and probably going to get to stop in St Mary Street as well.
And so you you kind of save your best material and a bit of energy for that.
But basically you either you either like it or you don't.
And there's a people in Wunderbras who they they want to be in the band in order to be in the band.
You have to do parades.
So they put up with having to do parades.
And there are some in the band and all the leaders of the band, this includes who actually love doing parades because we've got this image of this romantic image of New Orleans parades and things like that.
And we'd all love to be in the New Orleans parade.
So we're trying to do that thing in Cardiff and we really believe in it.
And if you actually sign up for it and get into it and and because we worked really hard on making this street music work without trying to copy the New Orleans.
So we've drafted in arrangements from popular music that people in the crowd will recognise.
You know, because in New Orleans, they know all the traditional material.
So they play Saint and everybody loves it.
Whereas we'll play Kanye West and you get sort of, oh, but is that really what they're playing?
Are they really playing that?
So we get that kind of recognition factor.
But some of us really love it.
And and you don't really if you if you're actually committed to it and a couple of hours of really hard work.
You know, you bring a hip flask for a bit of energy replacement.
But if you if you really love it, then you don't think about what it's physically costing you until afterwards.
The next day, you're absolutely shattered.
But, you know, there are people who are never going to get that into it and they're doing it as a kind of suffer under sufferance.
And then there are people who just are totally into it and love it.
And if the weather's bad, it's harder to enjoy it.
It has to be said.
But if the weather's nice and the crowd are nice and and people are helping you,
because sometimes people really help you on the parade.
There was one.
There was one year, I remember I could see the woman there.
She's got that blue headdress on.
What's her name?
Atiola.
She was she was kind of with the band and she was she was being sort of I don't know.
But she was dancing around the band and she had so much energy and she was so good.
And she knew what carnival was about.
You could tell the way she interacted with people.
She was some kind of spirit.
And that made the band really got behind her and really performed that because she she kind of they followed her cue.
She was totally into it and she's an amazing performer.
She looks amazing.
The costume that she was wearing was amazing and the band just completely got into it.
She was dancing all around us and everything.
She just didn't stop for two hours.
And that was fantastic.
So when you when you've got people who really kind of they're almost like guiding spirits who get you through it.
When you've got people in in the carnival crew who will do that,
then that's great because then you feel like you're really part of something really big then.
And and then somewhere at the back of mind, the mind you're actually thinking,
well, when if it's Mardi Gras,
they'll start doing this around 11 in the morning
and they'll still be doing it at 11 at night.
So two hours is not two hours is not that bad, really.
I mean, they probably sound really ropey after 12 hours doing it.
But, you know, two hours isn't that bad, really.
We're wusses.
Clark Carnival has proved to be weatherproof in the sense that even when the weather is atrocious
and I'll refer to the three years in a row that 2005, six and seven were from setting up
the entire parade and the rest of it, we had, I mean, atrocious weather really, you know,
our audience had to be completely weatherproofed.
And that's mad.
What are the difficulties involved in actually playing brass in a consistent torrent?
Well, it's pretty it's pretty much impossible.
We have done it.
We have done things where we've been waiting to go on the parade and it just
absolutely the heavens have opened and we've just taken it on the chin and just gone with it.
Really, the rain does brass instruments do not like the rain.
The worst thing is saxes and flutes and wind and things like that,
because the mechanisms are very difficult and it actually rusts the mechanism.
So you can actually wreck an instrument if you, you know, if water gets in there.
The other brass, trumpets and trombones, tubas, things like that, they're not so vulnerable
because they don't have the delicate machinery, bit of oil all sorted out.
And they don't have the, you know, because so that's it really.
And you always leave it up to the players.
If a player is so worried about their instrument that they feel that they're going to
have to have thousands of pounds of work done on it, then they just leave.
They just don't do it.
And I don't make them do it.
It's up to them.
I don't try and make them do it.
I say if you're, you know, if you're concerned about your instrument, just,
but a lot of people have got kind of will borrow,
will have a cheap old student instrument that they'll bring along to parades.
If they think it's going to rain, things like that.
People generally tend to get into it, but it is really tricky.
It's the same for everybody else is that your fingers are slippy on the instrument and you,
it means you can't play the notes.
You intend to play a note and you don't get the right note.
You, you also, the wind in your, the rain in your eyes is a problem.
It's best if you've got some kind of head gear that keeps the rain out of your eyes
because that can be really horrible.
Apart from that, same for everybody else, really same, same as it is for everybody else.
It's horrible when it's raining and it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's,
that's one reason why street street art hasn't really taken off in this country.
It's the weather.
Yeah. I mean, whether it's fairly predictable in, in other places.
Obviously this project, the anniversary project deals primarily with Cardiff carnival,
but as you, as you said in the opening remarks, you and I have
worked on projects that predate Cardiff carnival and in Swicker,
we've worked on other projects, which I would say, share the same celebratory outlook,
but their format and presentation have been different.
Which ones stick in your mind as we, as we look back at our history?
Well, we, before, before anybody has, any of us had got into our steady arts work,
if there's such a thing exists, exists.
We, we did the carnival, we did the fundraiser for the miners together.
And that was a memorable experience just because we were taking a hell of a risk, just
wandering into pubs and playing Christmas carols and collecting music.
But I think that was just making a big impact and then going as quickly as possible.
And it was, it was for a purpose.
I, we were raising specifically, I tried to play the old heartstrings.
It was specifically for presence for the striking miners children,
which you just thought most people couldn't get too annoyed about.
Well, most people didn't.
Most people were really nice.
There were a few exceptions, but they were, most people were really nice about it and
we were right behind it.
And, you know, and that's how I remember.
Yeah, we were.
Skinheads in the floor.
But there were a couple of, there were two pubs, I remember, where we were set upon in,
in to vary it, where for various reasons, one because political objections and one
because you shouldn't go in that pub really at that time on Friday night.
I believe you were groped in the spotlands.
Yeah, I was groped in the spotlands.
Which is a great title for an album, which is where you had to, to record it.
But, and then the floor of, it was a well-known right wing pub where people weren't very
sympathetic to what we were trying to do and we were probably under a bit of physical danger
there, but we got away eventually.
So there was that, yeah, making a big impact.
And I think that sort of had a spirit of straight work about it, really, just going there,
making a big impact and get out.
Yeah, guerrilla music.
We also, I mean, as I said, there was the, the Madov project, which is where you pulled
me into the Taliesin fold and that is kind of what led to the straight art, the swicker
and the carnival arts.
But the big things that we worked together on were in 1910, early 1910s, early 1910s,
1998, which was the bridge, a bont.
And the thing that we did up in Tolvine, which was called Crossing Borders, Torifiniai, and
yeah, those were, those were a bit like oratorios.
They were, yeah, so they were celebratory and they were very much creating a musical
structure that people could just get involved in and write from people who'd never played
samba.
Kids in schools who'd never played samba getting good enough to go on stage and perform
samba in a very short period of time.
To amateur choirs, to brass bands, to wonder brass were involved.
We had a tabla group, we had a rapper, we had folk singer, gospel choir, things like
that.
So it was just bringing together a lot of existing groups and trying to make something
interesting out of the combination and writing original music for them.
That was the amazing thing because it just gave me a big canvas to work with and just,
you know, it's a bit daunting to write for 100 people and then to try and coordinate
a performance of 100 people.
But it's that, you know, that big canvas is a really exciting project to be able to
work on really, to write for.
The bridge in particular is a project I feel quite proud of and your role in that was,
you know, totally central in the rest of it.
My only shame, looking back, the only shame is of course it was for one night only, one
performance.
I mean, we haven't recorded but there seems to be a body of work and a body of music in
particular which is, even now, I can listen to and think it's fabulous.
We often have visitors or colleagues from elsewhere in the world and sometimes from
carnival cities, you know, etc.
And there's a track there that I play quite regularly and put it on, I don't let them
know what it is, and I ask them about the hank of it and then they tell me they feel
it's exuberant and wonderful.
Who's written this?
What is this?
Where did this, where's it from?
And I explain it came from Cardiff and, yeah, largely from your head with all the
resources that were put together.
And for me that's a very telling moment where they just go like, wow, that could be any
carnival city in the world, that is carnival music.
Yeah, I'm really proud of that, I've always, you know, ever since we did that, just because
of the, just at some point we actually, we planned it out and then the money comes
through and then you put all the groups, you get all the groups, you talk to these groups,
they're interested, you go and meet them and they say, yeah, we'll do it.
And then everybody goes away and they say, right, and you say, right, I've got to write
that music now, 45 minutes of music for probably about an hour of music, I can't remember exactly
the length of it, it was definitely between 45 and an hour.
That sounds right.
Of all, for all those people and nobody's going to get off stage for the whole time,
so you've got to try and keep them busy for the whole time.
And that was, and then, and then, and who's going to help me write it?
Well, nobody.
But it was great.
The one great thing about that was that I didn't feel like I was on my own because
Menna was there as well, Menna Elvin wrote the words for that and she was great because
she was doing some kind of opera project and she was faxing me lyrics from New York,
this just felt really glamorous, something, something, yeah, just getting the fax of a
new bit that she'd written from New York.
So even though she was doing something in New York and working, developing an idea for
an opera or something, she was still thinking about this piece that we were going to do.
So yeah, that was that was really exciting and but really challenging as well and I
sweated a lot of that one.
I think you really pulled it off.
As you have done with this interview, Rob Smith, what can I say other than it's been
a pleasure working with you for more than 25 years.
Yeah.
And yeah, we did have a project in the pipeline again, unfortunately, Money Won't West, which
was called The Demon King and was going to reflect some of your more current musical
influences and the rest of it.
Shall we end just by, can you tell us where you're coming from, what that might hold in
the future and your trip to media?
Okay, yeah, well, we around the time, around the time that Madoc happened, which is 1989,
I believe, a way of continuing that relationship that you developed with the Samaj Centre in
Grangetown was to use Vishram Vasani, who is the local, he was a kind of music community
music leader, but obviously the place was also a temple.
So it was very much to do with Hindu culture and Gujarat, where a lot of those guys came
from, but it was to build on his expertise in music and to give, to allow the kids in
on that, bring the kids in on that.
And one of the ways that we decided to do that was he would give us pieces of music
to learn and we'd kind of, we'd notate it in Indian notation and then teach the kids
how to play on keyboards.
So we were kind of, we were kind of cultural intermediaries really between Vishram's
generation and I suppose his grandchildren or his children's or grandchildren's
generation.
And that was great because I learned a lot about Indian music on that.
I'd studied Indian music a little bit at university, but it's all very dry and theoretical
when you do it there, but actually to get your hands dirty and get down there and actually
learn some stuff and then teach it to some Indian kids or kids, Welsh kids, but whose
ancestry is Indian.
That was really exciting and I've always, I've treasured that really as a special place
in my musical treasure chest, if you like, for a long time.
And this year I was able to renew that by going to India and working with some top
flight Indian musicians, put a track together.
I went with Jenny Allen and we went over with some Welsh folk music.
We combined it with Indian ragas and we created a track there with some Indian musicians,
which is upon SoundCloud as we speak.
But also there was the project, there was the, around that time you were mooting a project
which is based on the demon king, the going over to salon and rescuing, is it Princess
Sita?
That's right, yeah.
Ravana, evil swine, kidnapper.
From, and we were going to do a sort of carnival-esque version of that, but using
Indian musical influences.
And so at some point we should be able, at some point we should be able to do that
because we've now, you know, we've gone to India and done a bit of research and
I kind of know how the music works well enough to kind of draw on that influence to create
some music that would be specific to the project.
And so I think hopefully at some point that project will happen.
I sincerely hope so.
Because we've done a lot of the groundwork really by applying for little bits of money
from here and there and listening to and working with Indian musicians and all the
ammunition is there to create that project so we should be able to do it at some point.
I sincerely hope to put that funding bullet in the gun and make it happen.
Rob Smith, you are more than the carnival hero with 20 carnivals under your belt.
Now you're the mainstay of celebratory music in Wales as far as I'm concerned.
Well, we haven't talked about samba.
So when we were first doing music with brass, we were very much involved with the samba band
as well.
And so I think for me, for the early Swicker carnivals, samba was the sound of the carnival
and the brass was like more ambition than achievement.
The problem with working with the samba band was that there's a lot of them and they play
really loud.
So obviously we were outgunned a lot of the time.
So in the end, we've kind of done our own thing.
But I think the hats off to the samba band because the samba galettes and all that,
the samba offer is a much more open offer.
You need a little bit of instrumental skill to do the brass stuff.
Whereas with samba, it's a very open offer and people can get involved at a very,
you know, beginners can get involved and learn the patterns and work their way up.
So I think for me, yeah, probably more samba is the sound of carnival.
But I agree, we've sort of contributed something to the sound of carnival and carnival.
I would never downgrade that.
I think, no, not yourself, Wonder Brass, the music.
It's been the soundtrack that's animated.
The city streets.
Mr Rob Smith, we thank you and salute you.
Thank you.
Ti ma de.